
--- PAGE 25 ---
force that the disc exerts on the body at the moment when it is located
at□the□distance r = 30 cmfrom□the□rotation□axis.
113. A horizontal smooth rod AB rotates with a constant angular velocity
ω = −2.00 rads 1 about a vertical axis passing through its endA. A freely
sliding sleeve of mass m = 0.50 kg moves along the rod from the point
A with the initial velocity v0 = 1.00 m/s. Find the Coriolis force acting
on the sleeve (in the reference frame fixed to the rotating rod) at the
moment when the sleeve is located at the distance r = 50 cmfrom the
rotation□axis.
114. A horizontal disc of radiusR rotates with a constant angular velocityω
about a stationary vertical axis passing through its edge. Along the
circumference of the disc a particle of mass m moves with a velocity
that is constant relative to the disc. At the moment when the particle is
at the maximum distance from the rotation axis, the resultant of the
inertial forces Fin acting on the particle in the reference frame fixed to
the□disc□turns□into□zero.□Find□:
(a) the□acceleration ω′ of□the□particle□relative□to□the□disc;
(b) the□dependence□of Fin on□the□distance□from□the□rotation□axis.
115. A small body of massm = 0.30 kg starts sliding down from the top of a
smooth sphere of radius R = 1.00 m. The spheres rotates with a
constant angular velocity ω = −6.0 rads 1 about a vertical axis passing
through its centre. Find the centrifugal force of inertia and the Coriolis
force at the moment when the body breaks off the surface of the sphere
in□the□reference□frame□fixed□to□the□sphere.
116. A train of mass m = 2000 tons moves in the latitude φ = °60 North.
Find:
(a) the magnitude and direction of the lateral force that the train exerts
on the rails if it moves along a meridian with a velocity v = 54 km
per□hour.
(b) in what direction and with what velocity the train should move for
the resultant for the inertial forces acting on the train in the
reference□frame□fixed□to□the□Earth□to□be□equal□to□zero.
117. At the equator a stationary (relative to the Earth) body falls down from
the height h = 500 m. Assuming the air drag to be negligible, find how
much off the vertical, and in what direction, the body will deviate
when□it□hits□the□ground.
1.3 Laws of Conservation of Energy, Momentum, and
Angular□Momentum
● Work□and□power□of□the□force F:
A d F ds s= =∫ ∫F r , P = Fv. …(1.3a)
● Increment□of□the□kinetic□energy□of□a□particle:
T T A2 1− = , …(1.3b)
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 19
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 26 ---
where A is the work performed by the resultant of all the forces acting on the
particle.
● Work performed by the forces of a field is equal to the decrease of the
potential□energy□of□a□particle□in□the□given□field:
A U U= − 1 2 . …(1.3c)
● Relationship between the force of a field and the potential energy of a
particle□in□the□field:
F = − ∇ U, …(1.3d)
ie, the□force□is□equal□to□the□antigradient□of□the□potential□energy.
● Increment of the total mechanical energy of a particle in a given potential
field:
E E A2 1− = extr, …(1.3e)
where Aextr is the algebraic sum of works performed by allextraneous forces
that□is,□by□the□forces□not□belonging□to□those□of□the given field.
● Increment□of□the□total□mechanical□energy□of□a□system:
E E A A2 1− = + ext int
noncons, …(1.3f)
where E T U= + , and U is□the inherient potential□energy□of□the□system.
● Law□of□momentum□variation□of□a□system;
d dtp/ F, = …(1.3g)
where F is□the□resultant□of□all external forces.
● Equation□of□motion□of□the□system’s□centre□of□inertia:
m d
dt
Cv F= , …(1.3h)
where F is□the□resultant□of□all external forces.
● Kinetic□energy□of□a□system
T T mvC= +~ ,
2
2
…(1.3i)
where ~T is□its□kinetic□energy□in□the□system□of□centre□of□inertia.
● Equation□of□dynamics□of□a□body□with□a□variable□mass:
m d
dt
dm
dt
v F u= + , …(1.3j)
where u is the velocity of the separated (gained) substance relative to the
body□considered.
● Law□of□angular□momentum□variation□of□a□system:
d
dt
M N= , …(1.3□k)
where M is the angular momentum of the system, andN is the total moment
of□all external forces.
● Angular□momentum□of□a□system:
M M r P= +~ [ ],C …(1.3l)
where ~M is its angular momentum in the system of the centre of inertia,rC is
the radius vector of the centre of inertia, and p is the momentum of the
system.
20 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 27 ---
118. A particle has shifted along some trajectory in the planexy from point
1 whose radius vector r i j1 2= + to point 2 with the radius vector
r i j.2 2 3= − During that time the particle experienced the action of
certain forces, one of which beingF i j.= +3 4 Find the work performed
by□the□force F. (Here r1, r2 and F are□given□in□SI□units).
119. A locomotive of mass m starts moving so that its velocity varies
according to the law v a s= , where a is a constant, and s is the
distance covered. Find the total work performed by all the forces
which are acting on the locomotive during the first t seconds after the
beginning□of□motion.
120. The kinetic energy of a particle moving along a circle of radius R
depends on the distance covered s as T as= 2, where a is a constant.
Find□the□force□acting□on□the□particle□as□a□function□of s.
121. A body of massm was slowly hauled up the hill
(Fig. 1.29) by a forceF which at each point was
directed along a tangent to the trajectory. Find
the work performed by this force, if the height
of the hill is h, the length of its base l, and the
coefficient□of□friction k.
122. A disc of mass m = 50 g slides with the zero
initial velocity down an inclined plane set at an
angle α = °30 to the horizontal; having
traversed the distance l = 50 cm along the horizontal plane, the disc
stops. Find the work performed by the friction forces over the whole
distance, assuming the friction coefficient k = 0.15 for both inclined
and□horizontal□planes.
123. Two bars of masses m1 and m2 connected by a non-deformed light
spring rest on a horizontal plane. The coefficient of friction between
the bars and the surface is equal to k. What minimum constant force
has to be applied in the horizontal direction to the bar of mass m1 in
order□to□shift□the□other□bar?
124. A chain of mass m = 0.80 kg and length l = 1.5 m rests on a
rough-surfaced table so that one of its ends hangs over the edge. The
chain starts sliding off the table all by itself provided the overhanging
part equals η = 1
3 of the chain length. What will be the total work
performed by the friction forces acting on the chain by the moment it
slides□completely□off□the□table?
125. A body of mass m is thrown at an angle α to the horizontal with the
initial velocity v0. Find the mean power developed by gravity over the
whole time of motion of the body, and the instantaneous power of
gravity□as□a□function□of□time.
126. A particle of mass m moves along a circle of radius R with a normal
acceleration varying with time asw atn = 2,where a is a constant. Find
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 21
F
m
l
h
Fig.□1.29
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 28 ---
the time dependence of the power developed by all the forces acting on
the particle, and the mean value of this power averaged over the first
t seconds□after□the□beginning□of□motion.
127. A small body of massm is located on a horizontal plane at the pointO.
The□body□acquires□a□horizontal□velocity v0. Find:
(a) the mean power developed by the friction force during the whole
time of motion, if the friction coefficient k = 0.27, m = 1.0 kg, and
v0
1= −1.5 ms ;
(b) the maximum instantaneous power developed by the friction
force, if the friction coefficient varies as k x= α , where α is a
constant,□and x is□the□distance□from□the□point O.
128. A small body of mass m = 0.10 kg moves in the reference frame
rotating about a stationary axis with a constant angular velocity
ω = −5.0 rads 1. What work does the centrifugal force of inertia perform
during the transfer of this body along an arbitrary path from point 1 to
2 which are located at the distances r1 30= cm and r2 50= cm from the
rotation□axis?
129. A system consists of two springs connected in series and having the
stiffness coefficients k1 and k2. Find the minimum work to be
performed□in□order□to□stretch□this□system□by ∆l.
130. A body of massm is hauled from the Earth’s surface by applying a force
F varying with the height of ascent y as F = −2 1( ) ,ay mg where a is a
positive constant. Find the work performed by this force and the
increment of the body’s potential energy in the gravitational field of
the□Earth□over□the□first□half□of□the□ascent.
131. The potential energy of a particle in a certain field has the form
U a
r
b
r= −2 ,where a and b are positive constants,r is the distance from
the□centre□of□the□field.□Find□:
(a) the value of r0 corresponding to the equilibrium position of the
particle;□examine□whether□this□position□is□steady;
(b) the maximum magnitude of the attraction force; draw the plotsU r( )
and F rr( ) (the□projection□of□the□force□on□the□radius□vector r).
132. In a certain two-dimensional field of force the potential energy of a
particle has the form U x y= +α β2 2 , where α and β are positive
constants□whose□magnitudes□are□different.□Find□out:
(a) whether□this□field□is□central;
(b) what is the shape of the equipotential surfaces and also of the
surfaces for which the magnitude of the vector of force
F = constant.
133. There are two stationary fields of forceF i= ay and F i j= +ax by ,where
i and j are the unit vectors of the x and y axes, and a and b are
constants.□Find□out□whether□these□fields□are□potential.
22 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 29 ---
134. A body of mass m is pushed with the initial velocityv0 up an inclined
plane set at an angle α to the horizontal. The friction coefficient is
equal to k. What distance will the body cover before it stops and what
work□do□the□friction□forces□perform□over□this□distance?
135. A small disc A slides down with initial velocity equal to zero from the
top of a smooth hill of heightH having a horizontal portion (Fig. 1.30).
What must be the height of the horizontal portion h to ensure the
maximum□distance s covered□by□the□disc?□What□is□it□equal□to?
136. A small body A starts sliding from the height h down an inclined
groove□passing□into□a□half-circle□of□radius h/2 (Fig.□1.31).
Assuming the friction to be negligible, find the velocity of the body at
the□highest□□point□of□its□trajectory□(after□breaking□off□the□groove).
137. A ball of mass m is suspended by a thread of length l. With what
minimum velocity has the point of suspension to be shifted in the
horizontal direction for the ball to move along the circle about that
point? What will be the tension of the thread at the moment it will be
passing□the□horizontal□position?
138. A horizontal plane supports a stationary vertical cylinder of radius R
and a disc A attached to the cylinder by a horizontal thread AB of
length l0 (Fig. 1.32, top view). An initial velocity v0 is imparted to the
disc as shown in the figure. How long will it move along the plane until
it□strikes□against□the□cylinder?□The□friction□is□assumed□to□be□absent.
139. A smooth rubber cord of length l whose coefficient of elasticity is k is
suspended by one end from the point O (Fig. 1.33). The other end is
fitted with a catchB. A small sleeve A of mass m starts falling from the
point O. Neglecting the masses of the thread and the catch, find the
maximum□elongation□of□the□cord.
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 23
A
H
h s
h/2h
A
Fig.□1.30 Fig.□1.31
R l0
v0
B A
O
A
B
Fig.□1.32 Fig.□1.33
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 30 ---
140. A small bar A resting on a smooth horizontal plane is attached by
threads to a pointP (Fig. 1.34) and, by means of a weightless pulley, to
a□weight B possessing□the□same□mass□as□the□bar□itself.
Besides, the bar is also attached to a point O by means of light
non-deformed spring of length l0 50= cm and stiffness x mg l= 5 0/ ,
where m is the mass of the bar. The threadPA having been burned, the
bar starts moving. Find its velocity at the moment when it is breaking
off□the□plane.
141. A horizontal plane supports a plank with a bar of mass m = 1.0 kg
placed on it and attached by a light elastic non-deformed cord of
length l0 40= cm to a point O (Fig. 1.35). The coefficient of friction
between the bar and the plank equal k = 0.20. The plank is slowly
shifted to the right until the bar starts sliding over it. It occurs at the
moment when the cord deviates from the vertical by an angle θ = °30 .
Find the work that has been performed by that moment by the friction
force□acting□on□the□bar□in□the□reference□frame□fixed□to□the□plane.
142. A smooth light horizontal rod AB can rotate about a vertical axis
passing through its endA. The rod is fitted with a small sleeve of mass
m attached to the endA by a weightless spring of lengthl0 and stiffness
x. What work must be performed to slowly get this system going and
reaching□the□angular□velocity ω ?
143. A pulley fixed to the ceiling carries a thread with bodies of massesm1
and m2 attached to its ends. The masses of the pulley and the thread
are negligible, friction is absent. Find the accelerationwC of the centre
of□inertia□of□this□system.
24 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
l0
A
O
p
B
l0
O
m
Fig.□1.34 Fig.□1.35
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 31 ---
144. Two interacting particles form a closed system whose
centre of inertia is at rest. Fig. 1.36 illustrates the positions
of both particles at a certain moment and the trajectory of
the particle of massm1.Draw the trajectory of the particle of
mass m1 and m m
2
1
2= .
145. A closed chain A of mass m = 0.36 kg is attached to a
vertical rotating shaft by means of a thread (Fig. 1.37), and
rotates with a constant angular velocity ω = −35 1rads . The
thread forms an angle θ = °45 with the vertical. Find the distance
between the chain’s centre of gravity and the rotation axis, and the
tension□of□the□thread.
146. A round cone A of mass m = 3.2 kg and half-angle α = °10 rolls
uniformly and without slipping along a round conical surfaceB so that
its apex O remains stationary (Fig. 1.38). The centre of gravity of the
cone A is at the same level as the point O and at a distance l = 17 cm
from□it.□The□cone’s□axis□moves□with□angular□velocity ω . Find□:
(a) the□static□friction□force□acting□on□the□cone A, if ω = −1.0 rads 1;
(b) at what values of ω the cone A will roll without sliding, if the
coefficient□of□friction□between□the□surfaces□is□equal□to k = 0.25.
147. In the reference frame K two particles travel along the x-axis, one of
mass m1 with velocity v1, and the other of mass m2 with velocity v2.
Find□:
(a) the velocity V of the reference frame K ′in which the cumulative
kinetic□energy□of□these□particles□is□minimum;
(b) the□cumulative□kinetic□energy□of□these□particles□in□the K ′frame.
148. The reference frame, in which the centre of inertia of a given system of
particles is at rest, translates with a velocity V relative to an inertial
reference frame K. The mass of the system of particles equals m, and
the total energy of the system in the frame of the centre of inertia is
equal to ~.E Find the total energy E of this system of particles in the
reference□frame K.
149. Two small discs of masses m1 and m2 interconnected by a weightless
spring rest on a smooth horizontal plane. The discs are set in motion
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 25
θ
A
2α AO
B
Fig.□1.37 Fig.□1.38
m2
m1
Fig.□1.36
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 32 ---
with initial velocities v1 and v2 whose directions are mutually
perpendicular and lie in a horizontal plane. Find the total energy ~E of
this□system□in□the□frame□of□the□centre□of□inertia.
150. A system consists of two small spheres of masses m1 and m2
interconnected by a weightless spring. At the momentt = 0 the spheres
are set in motion with the initial velocities v1 and v2 after which the
system starts moving in the Earth’s uniform gravitational field.
Neglecting the air drag, find the time dependence of the total
momentum of this system in the process of motion and of the radius
vector of its centre of inertia relative to the initial position of the
centre.
151. Two bars of masses m1 and m2 connected by
a weightless spring of stiffness x (Fig. 1.39)
rest□on□a□smooth□horizontal□plane.
Bar 2 is shifted a small distance x to the left
and then released. Find the velocity of the
centre□of□inertia□of□the□system□after□bar□1□breaks□off□the□wall.
152. Two bars connected by a weightless spring
of stiffness x and length (in the
non-deformed state) l0 rest on a horizontal
plane. A constant horizontal force F starts
acting on one of the bars as shown in Fig. 1.40. Find the maximum and
minimum distances between the bars during the subsequent motion of
the□system,□if□the□masses□of□the□bars□are
(a) equal;
(b) equal to m1 and m2,and the forceF is applied to the bar of massm2
153. A system consists of two identical cubes, each of mass m,
linked together by the compressed weightless spring of
stiffness x (Fig. 1.41). The cubes are also connected by a
thread which is burned through at a certain moment. Find:
(a) at what values of ∆ l, the initial compression of the
spring, the lower cube will bounce up after the thread
has□been□burned□through:
(b) to what height h the centre of gravity of this system
will rise if the initial compression of the spring
∆l mg x= 7 / .
154. Two identical buggies 1 and 2 with one man in each moves without
friction due to inertia along the parallel rails towards each other. When
the buggies get opposite each other, the men exchange their places by
jumping in the direction perpendicular to the motion direction. As a
consequence, buggy 1 stops and buggy 2 keeps moving in the same
direction, with its velocity becoming equal to v. Find the initial
velocities of the buggies v1 and v2 if the mass of each buggy (without a
man)□equal M and□the□mass□of□each□man m.
26 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
1 2
x
Fig.□1.39
m1
x m2 F
Fig.□1.40
m
m
Fig.□1.41
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 33 ---
155. Two identical buggies move one after the other due to inertia (without
friction) with the same velocity v0. A man of mass m rides the rear
buggy. At a certain moment the man jumps into the front buggy with a
velocity u relative to his buggy. Knowing that the mass of each buggy is
equal to M, find the velocities with which the buggies will move after
that.
156. Two men, each of mass m, stand on the edge of a stationary buggy of
mass M. Assuming the friction to be negligible, find the velocity of the
buggy after both men jump off with the same horizontal velocity u
relative to the buggy: (1) simultaneously; (2) one after the other. In
what case will the velocity of the buggy be greater and how many
times?
157. A chain hangs on a thread and touches the surface of a table by its
lower end. Show that after the thread has been burned through, the
force exerted on the table by the falling part of the chain at any
moment is twice as great as the force of pressure exerted by the part
already□resting□on□the□table.
158. A steel ball of mass m = 50 g falls from the height h = 1.0 m on the
horizontal surface of a massive slab. Find the cumulative momentum
that the ball imparts to the slab after numerous bounces, if every
impact□decreases□the□velocity□of□the□ball η = 1.25 times.
159. A raft of mass M with a man of massm aboard stays motionless on the
surface of a lake. The man moves a distance l′relative to the raft with
velocity v′( )t and then stops. Assuming the water resistance to be
negligible,□find:
(a) the□displacement□of□the□raft l relative□to□the□shore;
(b) the horizontal component of the force with which the man acted
on□the□raft□during□the□motion.
160. A stationary pulley carries a rope whose one end supports a ladder
with a man and the other end the counterweight of mass M. The man
of mass m climbs up a distance l′with respect to the ladder and then
stops. Neglecting the mass of the rope and the friction in the pulley
axle,□find□the□displacement l of□the□centre□of□inertia□of□this□system.
161. A cannon of massM starts sliding freely down a smooth inclined plane
at an angleα to the horizontal. After the cannon covered the distancel,
a shot was fired, the shell leaving the cannon in the horizontal
direction with a momentump. As a consequence, the cannon stopped.
Assuming the mass of the shell to be negligible, as compared to that of
the□cannon,□determine□the□duration□of□the□shot.
162. A horizontally flying bullet of massm gets stuck in a
body of mass M suspended by two identical threads
of length l (Fig. 1.42). As a result, the threads swerve
through□an□angle θ. Assuming m M<< , find□:
(a) the velocity of the bullet before striking the body;
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 27
m M
l l
Fig.□42
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 34 ---
(b) the fraction of the bullet’s initial kinetic energy that turned into
heat.
163. A body of mass M (Fig. 1.43) with a small disc
of mass m placed on it rests on a smooth
horizontal plane. The disc is set in motion in
the horizontal direction with velocity v. To
what height (relative to the initial level) will
the disc rise after breaking off the bodyM? The
friction□is□assumed□to□be□absent.
164. A small disc of massm slides down a smooth
hill of height h without initial velocity and
gets onto a plank of mass M lying on the
horizontal plane at the base of the hill (Fig.
1.44). Due to friction between the disc and
the plank the disc slows down and,
beginning with a certain moment, moves in
one□piece□with□the□plank.
(1) Find the total work performed by the
friction□forces□in□this□process.
(2) Can it be stated that the result obtained does not depend on the
choice□of□the□reference□frame?
165. A stone falls down without initial velocity from a height h onto the
Earth’s surface. The air drag assumed to be negligible, the stone hits
the ground with velocity v gh0 2= relative to the Earth. Obtain the
same formula in terms of the reference frame “falling” to the Earth with
a□constant□velocity v0.
166. A particle of mass 1.0 g moving with velocity v i j1 = −3.0 2.0
experiences a perfectly inelastic collision with another particle of
mass 2.0 g and velocityv j k2 = −4.0 6.0 . Find the velocity of the formed
particle (both the vector v and its modulus), if the components of the
vectors v1 and v2 are□given□in□the□SI□units.
167. Find the increment of the kinetic energy of the closed system
comprising two spheres of masses m1 and m2 due to their perfectly
inelastic collision, if the initial velocities of the spheres were equal to
v1 and v2.
168. A particle of mass m1 experienced a perfectly elastic collision with a
stationary particle of massm2.What fraction of the kinetic energy does
the□striking□particle□lose,□if
(a) it□recoils□at□right□angles□to□its□original□motion□direction;
(b) the□collision□is□a□head-on□one?
169. Particle 1 experiences a perfectly elastic collision with a stationary
particle□2.□Determine□their□mass□ratio,□if
(a) after a head-on collision the particles fly apart in the opposite
directions□with□equal□velocities;
28 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
h
m
M
Fig.□1.44
vm M
Fig.□1.43
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 35 ---
(b) the particles fly apart symmetrically relative to the initial motion
direction□of□particle□1□with□the□angle□of□divergence θ = °60 .
170. A ball moving translationally collides elastically with another,
stationary, ball of the same mass. At the moment of impact the angle
between the straight line passing through the centres of the balls and
the direction of the initial motion of the striking ball is equal to
α = °45 . Assuming the balls to be smooth, find the fraction η of the
kinetic energy of the striking ball that turned into potential energy at
the□moment□of□the□maximum□deformation.
171. A shell flying with velocity v = −500 1ms bursts into three identical
fragments so that the kinetic energy of the system increases η = 1.5
times.□What□maximum□velocity□can□one□of□the□fragments□obtain?
172. Particle 1 moving with velocity v = −10 1ms experienced a head-on
collision with a stationary particle 2 of the same mass. As a result of
the collision, the kinetic energy of the system decreased by η = 1.0%.
Find the magnitude and direction of the velocity of particle 1 after the
collision.
173. A particle of massm having collided with a stationary particle of mass
M deviated by an angleπ /2 whereas the particle M recoiled at an angle
θ = °30 to the direction of the initial motion of the particle m. How
much (in per cent) and in what way has the kinetic energy of this
system□changed□after□the□collision,□if M m/ = 5.0?
174. A closed system consists of two particles of masses m1 and m2 which
move□at□right□angles□to□each□other□with□velocities v1 and v2. Find
(a) the□momentum□of□each□particle□and
(b) the total kinetic energy of the two particles in the reference frame
fixed□to□their□centre□of□inertia.
175. A particle of mass m1 collides elastically with a stationary particle of
mass m m m2 1 2( ). > Find the maximum angle through which the
striking□particle□may□deviate□as□a□result□of□the□collision.
176. Three identical discs A, B, and C
(Fig. 1.45) rest on a smooth
horizontal plane. The discA is set is
motion with velocity v after which
it experiences an elastic collision
simultaneously with the discsB and
C. The distance between the centres
of the latter discs prior to the
collision is η times greater than the diameter of each disc. Find the
velocity of the discA after the collision. At what value ofη will the disc
A recoil□after□the□collision;□stop;□move□on?
177. A molecule collides with another, stationary, molecule of the same
mass.□Demonstrate□that□the□angle□of□divergence
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 29
A
v
B
C
Fig.□1.45
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 36 ---
(a) equals□90°□when□the□collision□is□ideally□elastic;
(b) differs□from□90°□when□the□collision□is□inelastic.
178. A rocket ejects a steady jet whose velocity is equal to u relative to the
rocket. The gas discharge rate equals µ kg s −1. Demonstrate that the
rocket□motion□equation□in□this□case□takes□the□form
mw F u= − µ ,
where m is the mass of the rocket at a given moment, w is its
acceleration,□and F is□the□external□force.
179. A rocket moves in the absence of external forces by ejecting a steady jet
with velocity u constant relative to the rocket. Find the velocity v of
the rocket at the moment when its mass is equal to m, if at the initial
moment it possessed the mass m0 and its velocity was equal to zero.
Make□use□of□the□formula□given□in□the□foregoing□problem.
180. Find the law according to which the mass of the rocket varies with
time, when the rocket moves with a constant acceleration w, the
external forces are absent, the gas escapes with a constant velocity u
relative□to□the□rocket,□and□its□mass□at□the□initial□moment□equals m0.
181. A spaceship of massm0 moves in the absence of external forces with a
constant velocity v0. To change the motion direction, a jet engine is
switched on. It starts ejecting a gas jet with velocity u which is
constant relative to the spaceship and directed at right angles to the
spaceship motion. The engine is shut down when the mass of the
spaceship decreases to m. Through what angle α did the motion
direction□of□the□spaceship□deviate□due□to□the□jet□engine□operation?
182. A cart loaded with sand moves along a horizontal plane due to a
constant force F coinciding in direction with the cart’s velocity vector.
In the process, sand spills through a hole in the bottom with a constant
velocityµ kgs−1.Find the acceleration and the velocity of the cart at the
moment t, if at the initial moment t = 0 the cart with loaded sand had
the mass m0 and its velocity was equal to zero. The friction is to be
neglected.
183. A flatcar of massm0 starts moving to the
right due to a constant horizontal forceF
(Fig. 1.46). Sand spills on the flatcar
from a stationary hopper. The velocity
of loading is constant and equal to
µ kgs−1.Find the time dependence of the
velocity and the acceleration of the flatcar in the process of loading.
The□friction□is□negligible□small.
30 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
F
Fig.□1.46
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 37 ---
184. A chain AB of length l is located in a
smooth horizontal tube so that its fraction
of length h hangs freely and touches the
surface of the table with its end B (Fig.
1.47). At a certain moment the end A of
the chain is set free. With what velocity
will this end of the chain slip out of the
tube?
185. The angular momentum of a particle
relative to a certain point O varies with time as M a b= + t 2, where a
and b are constant vectors, with a b.⊥ Find the force moment N
relative to the point O acting on the particle when the angle between
the□vectors N and M equals□45°.
186. A ball of mass m is thrown at an angle α to the horizontal with the
initial velocity v0. Find the time dependence of the magnitude of the
ball’s angular momentum vector relative to the point from which the
ball is thrown. Find the angular momentum M at the highest point of
the trajectory if m = 130 g,α = °45 , and v0
125= −ms . The air drag is to
be□neglected.
187. A disc A of mass m sliding over a smooth horizontal
surface with velocity v experiences a perfectly
elastic collision with a smooth stationary wall at a
point O (Fig. 1.48). The angle between the motion
direction of the disc and the normal of the wall is
equal□to α . Find□:
(a) the points relative to which the angular
momentum M of□the□disc□remains□constant□in□this□process;
(b) the magnitude of the increment of the vector of the disc’s angular
momentum relative to the pointO′which is located in the plane of
the□disc’s□motion□at□the□distance l from□the□point O.
188. A small ball of mass m suspended from the ceiling at a point O by a
thread of length l moves along a horizontal circle with a constant
angular velocity ω . Relative to which points does not angular
momentum M of the ball remain constant? Find the magnitude of the
increment of the vector of the ball’s angular momentum relative to the
point O picked□up□during□half□of□revolution.
189. A ball of mass m falls down without initial velocity from a height h
over the Earth’s surface. Find the increment of the ball’s angular
momentum vector picked up during the time of falling (relative to the
point O of the reference frame moving translationally in a horizontal
direction with a velocity V). The ball starts falling from the point O.
The□air□drag□is□to□be□neglected.
190. A smooth horizontal disc rotates with a constant angular velocity ω
about a stationary vertical axis passing through its centre, the pointO.
At a momentt = 0 a disc is set in motion from that point with velocityv0.
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 31
α O
Orl
A
Fig.□1.48
h
B
A
Fig.□1.47
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 38 ---
Find the angular momentum M t( ) of the disc relative to the point O in
the reference frame fixed to the disc. Make sure that this angular
momentum□is□caused□by□the□Coriolis□force.
191. A particle moves along a closed trajectory in a central field of force
where the particle’s potential energyU kr= 2 (k is a positive constant,r
is the distance of the particle from the centre O of the field). Find the
mass of the particle if its minimum distance from the pointO equals r1
and□□its□velocity□at□the□point□farthest□from O equals v2.
192. A small ball is suspended from a point O by a light thread of length l.
Then the ball is drawn aside so that the thread deviates through an
angle θ from the vertical and set in motion in a horizontal direction at
right angles to the vertical plane in which the thread is located. What is
the initial velocity that has to be imparted to the ball so that it could
deviate□through□the□maximum□angle π
2 in□the□process□of□motion?
193. A small body of mass m tied to a non-stretchable
thread moves over a smooth horizontal plane. The
other end of the thread is being drawn into a holeO
(Fig. 1.49) with a constant velocity. Find the thread
tension as a function of the distance r between the
body and the hole if atr r= 0 the angular velocity of
the□thread□is□equal□to ω 0.
194. A light non-stretchable thread is wound on a massive fixed pulley of
radius R. A small body of massm is tied to the free end of the thread. At
a moment t = 0 the system is released and starts moving. Find its
angular□momentum□relative□to□the□pulley□axle□as□a□function□of□time t.
195. A uniform sphere of mass m and radius R starts rolling without
slipping down an inclined plane at an angle α to the horizontal. Find
the time dependence of the angular momentum of the sphere relative
to the point of contact at the initial moment. How will the obtained
result□change□in□the□case□of□a□perfectly□smooth□inclined□plane?
196. A certain system of particles possesses a total momentum p and an
angular momentum M relative to a point O. Find its angular
momentum M′relative to a pointO′whose position with respect to the
point O is determined by the radius vector r0. Find out when the
angular momentum of the system of particles does not depend on the
choice□of□the□point O.
197. Demonstrate that the angular momentum M of the system of particles
relative□to□a□point O of□the□reference□frame K can□be□represented□as
M M r p= +~ [ ],C
where ~M is its proper angular momentum (in the reference frame
moving translationally and fixed to the centre of inertia), rC is the
radius vector of the centre of inertia relative to the point O, p is the
total□momentum□of□the□system□of□particles□in□the□reference□frame K.
32 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
F
m
O
Fig.□1.49
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 39 ---
198. A ball of mass m moving with velocity v0
experiences a head-on elastic collision with one
of the spheres of a stationary rigid dumbbell as
shown in Fig. 1.50. The mass of each sphere
equals m/ , 2and the distance between them is l.
Disregarding the size of the spheres, find the
proper angular momentum ~M of the dumbbell after the collision, ie,
the angular momentum in the reference frame moving translationally
and□fixed□to□the□dumbbell’s□centre□of□inertia.
199. Two small identical discs, each of mass m, lie on a smooth horizontal
plane. The discs are interconnected by a light non-deformed spring of
length l0 and stiffness x. At a certain moment one of the discs is set in
motion in a horizontal direction perpendicular to the spring with
velocity v0. Find the maximum elongation of the spring in the process
of□motion,□if□it□is□known□to□be□considerably□less□than□unity.
1.4 Universal□Gravitation
● Universal□gravitation□law
F m m
r
= γ 1 2
2 . …(1.4a)
● The squares of the periods of revolution off any two planets around the Sun
are□proportional□to□the□cubes□of□the□major□semiaxes□of□their□orbits□(Kepler):
T a2 3∝ . …(1.4b)
● Strength G and□potential φ of□the□gravitational□field□of□a□mass□point:
G r= − γ m
r3 , φ = − γ m
r
. …(1.4c)
● Orbital□and□escape□velocities:
v gR1 = , v v2 1 2= . …(1.4d)
200. A planet of mass M moves along a circle around the Sun with velocity
v = 34.9 km/s (relative to the heliocentric reference frame). Find the
period□of□revolution□of□this□planet□around□the□Sun.
201. The Jupiter’s period of revolution around the Sun is 12 times that of
the□Earth.□Assuming□the□planetary□orbits□to□be□circular,□find
(a) how many times the distance between the Jupiter and the Sun
exceeds□that□between□the□Earth□and□the□Sun;
(b) the velocity and the acceleration of Jupiter in the heliocentric
reference□frame.
202. A planet of mass M moves around the Sun along an ellipse so that its
minimum distance from the Sun is equal to r and the maximum
distance to R. Making use of Kepler’s laws, find its period of revolution
around□the□Sun.
203. A small body starts falling onto the Sun from a distance equal to the
radius of the Earth’s orbit. The initial velocity of the body is equal to
Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics | 33
m v0
l
m/2
m/2
Fig.□1.50
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts
--- PAGE 40 ---
zero in the heliocentric reference frame. Making use of Kepler’s laws,
find□how□long□the□body□will□be□falling.
204. Suppose we have made a model of the Solar system scaled down in the
ratio η but of materials of the same mean density as the actual
materials of the planets and the Sun. How will the orbital periods of
revolution□of□planetary□models□change□in□this□case?
205. A double star is a system of two stars moving around the centre of
inertia of the system due to gravitation. Find the distance between the
components of the double star, if its total mass equals M and the
period□of□revolution T.
206. Find□the□potential□energy□of□the□gravitational□interaction
(a) of two mass points of massesm1 and m2 located at a distancer from
each□other;
(b) of a mass point of mass m and a thin uniform rod of mass M and
length l, if they are located along a straight line at a distancea from
each□other;□also□find□the□force□of□their□interaction.
207. A planet of mass m moves along an ellipse around the Sun so that its
maximum and minimum distances from the Sun are equal to r1 and r2
respectively. Find the angular momentum M of this planet relative to
the□centre□of□the□Sun.
208. Using the conservation laws, demonstrate that the total mechanical
energy of a planet of mass m moving around the Sun along an ellipse
depends only on its semi-major axisa. Find this energy as a function of
a.
209. A planet A moves along an elliptical orbit around the Sun. At the
moment when it was at the distance r0 from the Sun its velocity was
equal to v0 and the angle between the radius vectorr0 and the velocity
vector v0 was equal to α . Find the maximum and minimum distances
that□will□separate□this□planet□from□the□Sun□during□its□orbital□motion.
210. A cosmic body A moves to the Sun with
velocity v0 (when far from the Sun) and
aiming parameter l the arm of the vector v0
relative to the centre of the Sun (Fig. 1.51.).
Find the minimum distance by which this
body□will□get□to□the□Sun.
211. A particle of mass m is located outside a
uniform sphere of mass M at a distance r
from□its□centre.□Find□:
(a) the potential energy of gravitational interaction of the particle and
the□sphere;
(b) the□gravitational□force□which□the□sphere□exerts□on□the□particle.
212. Demonstrate that the gravitational force acting on a particleA inside a
uniform□spherical□layer□of□matter□is□equal□to□zero.
213. A particle of mass m was transferred from the centre of the base of a
uniform□hemisphere□of□mass M and□radius R into□infinity.
34 | Physical□Fundamentals□of□Mechanics
A
v0
O
l
Fig.□1.51
Telegram @unacademyplusdiscounts